Jason Strachan: Hello. Hello
Jeff. Are you hearing me?
Jeff Anderson: Hello. Hello.
Jason Strachan: All right, give
me one second, since you're on
video, I am not quite the video
appropriate right now.
Jeff Anderson: Okay.
Jason Strachan: I mean, throw on
a jacket, give me a minute.
Jeff Anderson: No problem. You
don't need to dress up for me.
Jason Strachan: Okay. How are
you doing good, how about you?
Jeff Anderson: You look younger
than your picture.
Jason Strachan: I guess that's a
good thing, I think it's a good
thing.
Jeff Anderson: At my age, that's
a good thing.
Jason Strachan: How's it going
today? How's your day going?
Jeff Anderson: It's going well
how about you
Jason Strachan: Going well, no,
no complaints at all. Thank you
so much for helping us debut
this transcription service that
we're using, you know, we think
it'll be pretty good for the
clients because you'll, you
know, instead of having to write
down whatever we talked about
you'll be able to just get the
recording, and basically use it
to, you know, talk to your
clients or using whatever
fashion you feel is best.
Jeff Anderson: Yeah, yeah,
absolutely. Glad to do it and
send it up the line I think it's
a great idea because it will
enable me instead of sitting
here scribbling notes down to
really, I think better engage
with you and listen to you in a
at a higher qualitative level.
So, I'm all for it.
Jason Strachan: Absolutely,
absolutely. Well, once again,
thank you. I'm so how is first
things first, how is Kelly doing
right now?
Jeff Anderson: Um, I think that
she is stable, she is stage
four, as I understand it, and I
talked to her mother, about a
week ago, and I believe there is
either she's doing radiation
targeted radiation or, or she's
contemplating doing it there was
some discussion I'm pretty sure
of radiation being a modality
that they're going to try. Her
mother is, you know, very very
despondent, you know, in her
tone and in her you know she's
got a daughter is what 21 or 22
years old, who's, who's trying
to just go to school, she's in
college, I believe, and yet you
know she's got this, this cloud
hanging over her head this very,
very big cloud.
Jason Strachan: Yeah,
absolutely. So, I'll just get
into my backgrounds in
orthopedics, I'm pretty familiar
with, Ewing sarcoma
osteosarcoma, one of the luckier
things in this case is that it's
Ewing's and Ewing sarcoma, is it
a lot of the times it does
present as stage four, but it's
a very slow growing tumor So
that's the thing, or the PET
scan showed that there's really
no spread to solid organs so
it's just the involvement of the
vertebra, it's extremely
responsive to chemotherapy and
radiation. It's actually tapping
towards 100%, in terms of the
five year survival rate. Oh, I
think she will do well. And just
to get to the evaluation by
people before. Yeah, it's you
know it's really tough to state
that it should have been found.
The reason is, it's not hard so
patients with scoliosis. You're
going to be doing X rays
primarily, especially if the
curve is not severe enough to
require surgery. So someone
with, especially if they're not
finished growing, which she
wasn't at the time, you'd
believe that you would be
monitoring the growth so you
would just do serial X rays and
monitor and center, physical
therapy because the thought is
you want to increase the
strength of your core and the
stabilizing back muscles that
course that you would take,
rather than doing an MRI or a CT
scan, there's really no
indication for it, right unless,
unless they have another
syndrome. Like patients with
Marfan Syndrome, or some
patients with neuroblastoma,
where the neurofibromatosis.
Those patients can have the
arrangements within the spinal
cord, that would mandate, you
doing an MRI for them so if they
have a cord less than 40
degrees, sorry a curb less than
40 degrees for them. You would
do an MRI, but not for you know
a young girl with no other
issues with it with a curve that
seems to be idiopathic
adolescent scoliosis. The follow
up for me was appropriate. I
don't see any issue with it. By
the time that she began having
severe pain, and they started
observing following her up there
so that would have been earlier
in 2020. Yeah, if they had done
an MRI and found it, there
really would be no difference in
the management. So I don't
really see a standard of care
breach here, I think most
orthopedic surgeons most spine
surgeons would say that this is
what we would have done as well,
and especially because the
lumbar Ewing sarcoma is so rare.
It's usually more in the sacral
region and that is where you'd
end up having a poor prognosis.
So, I think they actually
managed her as well as they
should have. And luckily
throughout all of this I think
her prognosis is still good.
Despite unfortunately having to
go through chemo and radiation.
The fact is that, even if it's
had been found early, they would
have still had to put her
through chemo and radiation.
Jeff Anderson: I see. And for
that is because it's, it's so
slow growing, they would have
the change in terms of the
progression of the disease, or
the cancer wouldn't have been so
great that they would have been
more invasive or done a
different modality of treatment?
Jason Strachan: Yeah,
absolutely. Okay, in sarcoma,
the, the choice of management
has been chemotherapy, the
chemotherapy regimes that are
instituted are pretty successful
and work very well, they have
found recently so there's really
no change, they would have
always given her chemo.
Jeff Anderson: And I'm curious
how you came to know what seems
to me to be a significant amount
of, of, have a significant
amount of knowledge about this
particular cancer and do some
research and you have to happen
to have dabbled in this, so to
speak?
Jason Strachan: Okay, well, so I
grew up, practice medicine in
Jamaica, and we, in orthopedics
in Jamaica we do or own
orthopedics oncology. So we
manage osteosarcomas which
usually have a very poor
prognosis. We manage our Ewing
sarcomas, which usually have a
pretty good prognosis and
unfortunately we don't have as
readily accessible tests to be
able to evaluate so we use a lot
of clinical findings we use X
rays. If we can get an MRI or CT
scan we will eventually get to
it. But we have to manage those
so we become very comfortable
with the diagnosis because it's
ours to manage.
Jeff Anderson: Got it. But
again, prior to spring of last
year, spring of 2020, you just
don't see anything that should
have red flagged. To Dr.
Mantega, I believe his name is
at Bone and Joint Center. Hey,
there's something maybe going on
here beyond musculo-ligamentous
scolio-based or etiology, back
pain.
Jason Strachan: Yeah, I don't
think it would be, I mean, there
are some surgeons, probably
would have gone on a leg, very
early said hey you know what,
let me do a CT scan of this just
to check. But the vast majority
wouldn't. She's a growing girl,
she has scoliosis, it's very
common to have back pain
associated with scoliosis so it
is. And the back pain itself can
be very difficult to control, so
it's not too surprising that she
didn't really respond. But, but
according to physio she was
seeming to be paying fee, a lot
of the times, it's, it would be
a bit difficult point on it and
say hey you know, they should
have done this earlier and I
find it very tough to think
someone else, or, or the
consensus would be that they
should have ordered something
else, fairly in someone at that
age, and not with something
that's as distracting as clear.
Jeff Anderson: So scoliosis was
a very very good explanation for
her back pain, and this was not
a situation where there was some
symptoms some clinical
indication, some imaging that
should have been done, because
there was even an orange flag
popping up to Dr Mantega in a
differential forming in his
mind, hey, this doesn't look
like scoliosis based back pain,
this looks like something
different I quite don't quite
know what it is and therefore
the differential begins to form
in his head, and weigh maybe
down at the end of differential
is you and sarcoma, or something
like that, that that's just not
you does not seem that is that
is the picture that that should
have emerged here for him?
Jason Strachan: Yeah, it's the
scoliosis is a very, very
convenient, as is, I can promise
you that much like it's, that's,
that's very good. So, that's the
only, that's one of the few
things that could actually
excuse the fact that this was
not found on time because if
there was no other issue then
questions come, Hey, why wasn't
this done earlier and on the
fact that when she was having
numbness in the limbs, that's
when they referred her or
decided to do the MRI. That's
usually what happens because you
start to have spinal cord
involvement or nerve
involvement, and you decide that
this is when the, it should be
done, and they didn't wait, it
seemed pretty immediate, which
is how it should go.
Jeff Anderson: Yep. Yeah, and
the and the proper imaging to
take a look at what was going
on, once they knew something was
there, it looks like they
performed an MRI without
contrast. That's when they see
this four centimeter tumor, and
then they're scheduling her for
another with contrast, when she
ends up at the ER. So, okay.
Jason Strachan: That's the thing
about bodies because though
without contrast is to see if
there is anything impinging on
the nerve roots. So, when you
see that there is something at
the nerve root, at that point,
you would go for one with
contrast because with contrast
would pick up soft tissue,
tumors as well. And once you
pick up a soft tissue tumor,
after that, you'd opt for the
PET scan just to see if there's
any involvement elsewhere.
Jeff Anderson: Yeah, yeah. And
so a CT isn't really part of the
imaging hierarchy for this
problem?
Jason Strachan: Really, what the
CT scan, generally shows you is
really just bony invasion, it
gives you good bone details so
after the MRI, they were able to
see that there was something
involving the bone. You really
don't need a CT scan and once
you've already seen that on the
MRI. The MRI gives you more
detail.
Jeff Anderson: Okay, and no more
contrast in particular for soft
tissue differentiation. Okay.
Okay. I think you've answered
all the questions, and I, I
appreciate your giving me some
information that may provide me
with some hopeful feedback to to
mom. And do you. I know you're
in Manhattan.
Jason Strachan: Well, I live in,
I live in Westchester
Jeff Anderson: in Westchester,
so I would assume mom sounds
like a very well educated,
bright woman, I would assume
that mom or mom and dad, I'm not
sure if dad's around, but but
mom certainly is managing her
care, it sounds like, where,
from your base of knowledge,
doctor, would you suggest this
young lady would be well advised
to seek treatment? Would you, I
mean,
Jason Strachan: I, I've been,
I've only been in New York for a
few years. My ex wife was at was
admitted to Mount Sinai in the
Upper East Side for a month.
And, you know, we had a very
good experience there for as
good an experience as you can
have, at a hospital so I am
somewhat partial to there. I do
like it there. So, if, if she's
in Manhattan to get her daughter
there then I think that'd be
pretty good. I'm not really sure
if there's like a Sloan
Kettering, in New York, or what
if there is any you know that's
the, you know famous oncology
institute, pretty much anywhere,
anywhere that you can get
treatment started evaluated. I
see that she started already,
but wherever she's comfortable
is the most important thing.
Oncology, it's always meant to
be about the peace of mind. You
know, it's very, very taxing on
the entire family unit. It's
really just about getting the
adequate support, say, where she
is, she feels comfortable, and
especially she's well educated,
she should be fine.
Jeff Anderson: Yeah, okay. Okay,
great. Thank you very much that
this was a great review and I
really appreciate I remember you
from another case I think you I
think you reviewed a case
involving a situation that was a
Syracuse case. A woman had a
manipulation under anesthesia.
And there was I think a fib
fracture or a hip fracture, I
don't know femur fracture, maybe
it's femur because I think it-
Jason Strachan: I remember it
was a femur fracture, yeah.
Jeff Anderson: Yeah, so we ended
up not taking that case, I don't
know whether the woman retained
someone else but we turned it
down but I really appreciate
your review in that case so
Jason Strachan: No problem, Jeff
It was my pleasure. And thank
you very much for, you know,
allowing us to record this and
get this transcript service up
and running.
Jeff Anderson: Great, thanks
again doctor.
Jason Strachan: No prob, enjoy
the rest of your week, stay
safe.
Jeff Anderson: Stay well, stay
safe. Thank you. Alright, bye
bye.